Self-hosted Palette upgrade guides (#2303)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/enterprise-version/upgrade/upgrade-vmware/airgap.md

to the [Supported Upgrade Paths](../upgrade.md#supported-upgrade-paths) section for details.

If your setup includes a PCG, you must also
[allow the PCG to upgrade automatically](../../../clusters/pcg/manage-pcg/pcg-upgrade.md) before each major or minor
Palette upgrade. Additionally, if the new Palette version updates Kubernetes, you need to apply the Kubernetes updates
to your Enterprise Cluster profile.

:::

## Prerequisites

- Access to the Palette system console.

- Access to the Palette airgap support Virtual Machine (VM) that you used for the initial Palette installation.

- Refer to [Access Palette](/enterprise-version/#access-palette) to download the following from our support:
  - The new airgap Palette installation bin.
  - The OVA with the Operating System (OS) and Kubernetes distribution required for the Palette nodes (if the new
    version of Palette requires a new version of the OS and Kubernetes).

## Upgrade

1.  Use the following command template to SSH into the Palette airgap support VM. Enter the path to your private SSH
    key, your username, and the IP or domain of the airgap support VM. The default username is `ubuntu`.

    ```shell

>     ssh -identity_file </path/to/private/key> <username>@<vm-ip-or-domain>

Reviewer: the username for the airgap support VM instance is `ubuntu` so I think we can replace `<username>` with the default user we create.

    ```

    Consider the following command example for reference.

    ```shell
    ssh -identity_file /docs/ssh-private-key.pem ubuntu@palette.example.com
    ```

2.  Use the following command to switch to the `root` user account, which you need to proceed with the upgrade.

    ```shell
    sudo --login
    ```

3.  Use the following command template to download the new Palette airgap installation bin. Enter the username,
    password, and the Palette airgap installation URL you received from our support team. In the output file name,

>     replace `<version>` with the Palette version you're downloading.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    replace `<version>` with the Palette version you are downloading.
```
Optimizing for non-native English readers.

    ```

    Consider the following command example for reference.

    ```shell
    curl --user <username>:<password> --output airgap-4.1.12.bin https://software-private.spectrocloud.com/airgap/4.1.12/airgap-v4.1.12.bin
    ```

4.  Refer to the [Additional Packs](../../install-palette/airgap/supplemental-packs.md) page and update the packages you
    are currently using. You must update each package separately.

    To update a package, use the following command template to download and execute the pack binary.

    ```shell
    curl --remote-name <pack-name-url> && chmod +x <pack-name-version>.bin && ./<pack-name-version>.bin
    ```

    Consider the following example for reference.

    ```shell
    curl --remote-name https://software-private.spectrocloud.com/airgap/packs/airgap-pack-aws-alb-2.5.1.bin \
      && chmod +x airgap-pack-aws-alb-2.5.1.bin \
      && ./airgap-pack-aws-alb-2.5.1.bin
    ```

    ```shell
    Verifying archive integrity...  100%   MD5 checksums are OK. All good.
    Uncompressing Airgap Pack - aws-alb Version 4.0.17  100%
    Setting up Packs
    - Pushing Pack aws-alb:2.5.1
    Setting up Images
    Setup Completed

>     ```

Reviewer: Do we need to repeat the information in the additional packs page? I think if we mention the additional packs, that's plenty.

5.  Use the following command template to execute the new Palette airgap installation bin.

    ```shell
    chmod +x airgap-<version>.bin && ./airgap-<version>.bin
    ```

    Consider the following example for reference.

    ```shell
    chmod +x airgap-v4.2.13.bin && ./airgap-v4.2.13.bin
    ```

6.  After the Palette airgap binary is verified and uncompressed, it uploads the updates to your existing Palette
    instance. This step takes some time to complete.

    Once the airgap binary is executed, you will receive a **Setup Completed** success message.

    ```shell
    Verifying archive integrity...  100%   MD5 checksums are OK. All good.
    Uncompressing Airgap Setup - Version 4.2.13  100%
    Setting up CLI
    Setting up Manifests
    Setting up Packs
    ...

    //highlight-next-line
    Setup Completed

>     ```

Reviewer: Moving the output example before the bullet makes it easier for the reader, as they have a better mental context.

7.  Log in to the Palette system console.

8.  From the left **Main Menu**, select **Enterprise Cluster** and then select the **Profile** tab.

9.  Copy the configurations for your CSI, CNI, and Kubernetes layers to an external location for backup.

    :::warning

    If your Enterprise Cluster profile has configuration changes or additions, make sure to back up all the customized
    values to preserve them after the upgrade.

    :::

>     ![Self-hosted Palette system console with the highlighted Enterprise Cluster profile configuration values.](/enterprise-version_upgrade-upgrade_vmware_non-airgap_copy_configurations.webp)

Reviewer: I think this can be a tip, I don't really think we need to ask the user to do this, unless they want to.

10. From the left **Main Menu**, select **Administration** > **Pack Registries**. Then, next to your **spectro-packs**
    registry, select the **three-dot Menu** > **Sync**.

    Palette initiates a registry sync, which can take up to 30 minutes to complete.

11. From the left **Main Menu**, select **Update Management**. Once the registry sync is done, Palette will prompt you
    to update to the new version. Click **Update**.

    ![Self-hosted Palette system console with Update Management open and the Update button highlighted.](/enterprise-version_upgrade-upgrade_vmware_non-airgap_update.webp)

12. Review the changes that the upgrade introduces. If your Enterprise Cluster profile had any configuration changes or
    additions, add them to the **Current configuration** pane and select **Confirm**.

    :::warning

    Make sure to transfer the configuration changes and additions in all Enterprise Cluster profile layers to preserve
    them after the upgrade.

    :::

    ![Self-hosted Palette system console with the upgrade preview pane.](/enterprise-version_upgrade-upgrade_vmware_non-airgap_upgrade-preview.webp)

>     The system console locks for a couple of minutes while the upgrade is applied.

Reviewer: Same as before, we really need to. invest more time to heal the user here and understand what to do. It's very easy to mess up and get this step wrong 😅

:::info

Proceed with the following steps if the Palette upgrade introduces a new version of Kubernetes.

:::

13. Once the system console unlocks, from the left **Main Menu**, select **Enterprise Cluster** and then select the
    **Profile** tab.

14. Open each Enterprise Cluster profile layer and replace their configurations with the values you received from our

>     support team.

Reviewer: These two steps are not needed

The Enterprise Cluster initiates the Kubernetes upgrade and reconciles the Palette instance nodes.

## Validate

1. Log in to the Palette system console.

2. On the **Summary** page, Palette should display a message that states **You are using the latest version of
   Palette**.

>    ![Self-hosted Palette system console with upgraded system.](/enterprise-version_upgrade-upgrade_vmware_non-airgap_upgraded.webp)

Reviewer: We should mention to make sure the cluster status health card is healthy.
